# Summary of project

Startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
In order to enable Sparkify to parse and analyze their data in a distributed manner, a Spark ETL Pipeline is created, which reads the data stored inside S3.

# How to run the python scripts

To start the ETL pipeline, you have to run the following file below:

- **%run etl.py**

# Files in the repository

* **etl.py**: Python script to extract the needed information from Song and Log data inside the S3 buckets and parsing/inserting them to the local directory
* **dl.cfg**: Config file to store AWS/Configuration related information
* **testing.ipynb**: Jupyter notebook to test the ETL process
* **README**: File with project information
* **data**: Input data used to test the Spark ETL
* **results**: Output data from the Spark ETL


# The database schema design and ETL pipeline.

In order to enable Sparkify to analyze their data, a Relational Database Schema was created, which can be filled with an ETL pipeline.
The so-called star scheme enables the company to view the user behaviour over several dimensions.
The fact table is used to store all user song activities that contain the category "NextSong". Using this table, the company can relate and analyze the dimensions users, songs, artists and time.

# Dimension Tables and Fact Table

**songplays** - Fact table - records in log data associated with song plays
- songplay_id (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of each song play 
- start_time (DATE) NOT NULL: Timestamp of beggining of user activity
- userId (INT) NOT NULL: ID of user
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}
- song_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Song played
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Artist
- sessionId (INT): ID of the session
- location (TEXT): User location 
- userAgent (TEXT): Agent used by user to access Sparkify platform

**users** - users in the app
- userId (INT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of user
- first_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of user
- last_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Last Name of user
- gender (TEXT): Gender of user {M | F}
- level (TEXT): User level {free | paid}

**songs** - songs in music database
- song_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Song
- title (TEXT) NOT NULL: Title of Song
- artist_id (TEXT) NOT NULL: ID of Artist
- artist_name (TEXT): Name of artist
- year (INT): Year of song release
- duration (FLOAT) NOT NULL: Song duration in ms

**artists** - artists in music database
- artist_id (TEXT) PRIMARY KEY: ID of Artist
- artist_name (TEXT) NOT NULL: Name of Artist
- artist_location (TEXT): Name of Artist city
- artist_lattitude (FLOAT): Lattitude location of artist
- artist_longitude (FLOAT): Longitude location of artist

**time** - different dimensions of time
- start_time (DATE) PRIMARY KEY: Timestamp of record
- hour (INT): Hour associated to start_time
- day (INT): Day associated to start_time
- month (INT): Month associated to start_time 
- year (INT): Year associated to start_time


# Dataset used

The data is queried from s3 buckets hosten at AWS

* **Song data**: ```s3://udacity-dend/song_data```
* **Log data**: ```s3://udacity-dend/log_data```

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.